.TH "ssu-esl-seqrange" 1 "Feb 2016" "SSU-ALIGN 0.1.1" "SSU-ALIGN Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP
ssu-esl-seqrange - determine a range of sequences for one of many parallel processes.

.SH SYNOPSIS

.TP
.B ssu-esl-sfetch
.I [options]
.I seqfile
.I procidx
.I nproc

.SH DESCRIPTION

.pp
.B ssu-esl-seqrange
reads an indexed 
.I seqfile
and determines the range of sequence indices in that file that process
number 
.I procidx
out of
.I nproc
total processes should operate on during a parallel processing of 
.I seqfile.

.pp
The 
.I seqfile 
must be indexed first using 
.B ssu-esl-sfetch --index <seqfile>.
This creates an SSI index file
.I <seqfile>.ssi.
An SSI file is required in order for
.B ssu-esl-seqrange
to work.

Sequence index ranges are calculated using a simple rule: the number
of sequences for each process should be identical, or as close as
possible to identical, across all processes. The lengths of the sequences
are not considered (even though they probably should be).

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.TP
.BI --informat " <s>"
Specify that the sequence file is in format
.I <s>,
where 
.I <s> 
may be FASTA, Genbank, EMBL, Uniprot, or DDBJ.  This string
is case-insensitive ("genbank" or "GenBank" both work, for example).

.SH AUTHOR

Easel and its documentation are Copyright (C) 2016 HHMI Janelia Farm Research Campus.
Freely distributed under the BSD open source license..
See COPYING in the source code distribution for more details.
The Easel home page is: http://bioeasel.org/
